There were four children in Mother's family, so
what she inherited from her family, then Dad
doubled. So they had inherited land, and Dad
actually made the last payment on the land. in
December of 1969 and was dead in March of 70. Right,
so financially, your mother's family was better,
in Texas lingo, better off than your dad's family.
Yeah, yeah. But if I had asked your dad's father
what he did for a living, would he have said
ranching?
Farming? I don't know.
They may have had a little plot of land here and
there, but there was nothing handed down. Was your
dad the first to go to college?
Yes. What about on your mom's side of the family?
Had either of her parents gone to college? The
mother was a teacher. Her dad had like an eighth
grade education. But her mom was a teacher. Her mom
was a teacher. Because I'm thinking there, again,
is the typical America. It was that generation
that begins to make the difference in the
educational level. Same true in my family. You're
mom and dad's children. Oh, most all of that
generation. All right. So you were kind of excited
about moving here. Your mom's reaction, she
came... I can't really say I was really excited
about coming. I had really good friends in Austin.
Oh, okay. And I had a boyfriend. I'm not there for a
boyfriend. But once I got here, yeah. And you were
well-received. Oh, yes. All right. And your mom,
being a good wife, okay, if we're to move, do the
best I can. What were the activities in which she
plunged once she got here? You know, she had five
children, and my brother Bob was tiny. He had just
been born. He was born in 54, so he would have
been... Oh, I hadn't thought about it. He's a
little kid. He's little. And... So she really
didn't have time to do PTA and a lot of that. There
were too many. But what she did get into were all the
things on campus. The social club is still there.
Until she got sick, she really didn't miss
meetings. Who were her closest personal friends
in those early years? There was a group that wasn't
in the very early years, but in a little bit after
she'd been here for a while. developed the Ladies
Aid Society. And it was Jean Graff and Frances
Lindsey, Jim Lindsey's wife, and maybe Doris
Hannigan and Minnie Pope Cherry. The Cherries and
the Hannigans, as couples with mother and dad,
those three couples were good friends. Now,
that's Tom Cherry's wife. Tom Cherry's wife. Now,
your dad brought from Austin...
Mrs. Warren, the secretary? No. Oh, I forgot. Or
Meg Warren. I'm not sure that she came
immediately. that she had helped him in the land
office. But I'm trying to think, went to
Presbyterian Church, now deceased, who had been
at the land office as the, as a fiscal. Diebel.
Clark Diebel. Clark Diebel. Yeah. Tell me about
the, about Clark Diebel and your dad's
relationship with him. Yeah, I don't think I'm
being much help to you, because I really, you know,
I think that our generation has included children
much more. And frankly, when I got there, I was so
thrilled with all the activities at the high
school. So I was really kind of busy doing my thing.
All right, let's go to your dad's routine. I know
Dad had the highest respect for Clark Diebel. I
know there was a real bond there. And I understand
that. that when to clean up the land office, that
Clark was one of the key people in helping with
that. All right, as you recall your dad's
schedule, normally he headed to the office about
what time of day? Early. How early was early? Do you
remember things like that from when you were 16?
No, but was it? I don't. I don't know that he was
there for breakfast. And I assume school probably
started at 8 o'clock. One summer in Austin, before
we moved here, when I was 14, when it was still legal
to work that age, I interviewed, and I'm sure Dad
had set it up, and I worked that summer, just to take
a course in typing, and I worked at the TEA,
Teachers Education Agency, that was housed in the
same building, the old land office building where
Dad lived. And so that summer, he and I rode
together, and I remember we went very early. And we
stayed, you know. Was he home for supper most
nights?
Most nights. And do you remember his bringing a
briefcase or a whole bunch of paper home? No,
because he was two blocks from the office. He'd go
back. Okay, he'd go back to the office. And do you
remember his going back to the office many nights?
You know, isn't that awful? I knew that. I probably
would not remember. What about social events at
the house? Were there many? There were. There
were, because it was a grand old place for
entertainment. And the staffing of the house, was
there a cook? A maid? She was one and the same. There
was a man and a woman. I started to say a couple, but
that might imply more than it was. And they sort of
shared the duties. When the board was in town, were
you aware of a board meeting? Not back then.
Because they would have been not far across the
street. Now, the fire occurred, the house burned
when? 63. Are you home? I was home for winter break
from the University of Texas. And I remember...
going off on an errand. I think I may have given
Mother a permanent that morning. It was back when
we did each other's home firms. And coming back and
all this activity had started and you could see
smoke out of the ceiling. Out the roof. Now this was
during the Christmas break? January, yeah. Oh,
okay. And what time of day? It seems like the boys
were going to, the ones who were still on campus,
were going to Meals at Savisa. And I just remember
the windows in that old house went to the floor. And
I just remember furniture being passed through.
And I remembered stacks of dishes, and not one dish
was broken. And it was all literally just hand to
hand. So you're saying students and others?
Students and everything. Mine was the back room
and I had inherited from friends in Austin a lot of
formals. And I can remember the net just flying.
out the windows. Do you remember in hindsight any
special things that may have been lost? Probably
the pictures. When I left Brady, we had autograph
books. And my little growing up friends, you know,
we had autograph books and all those little
pictures. And I'm still friends with a lot,
several of us that grew up together. went to Santa
Fe a couple years ago, and we still do things
together. And a lot of those were lost. But no, in
terms of financial value, the losses were
moderate. Really, maybe the main thing, Dad had
sent me a doll during the war, and it had a real gold
skirt. And it was so fine, I was never allowed to
play with it. I could just look at it. And that was
lost.
But like, he didn't lose any heirlooms or any World
War II items that were priceless. There was some,
like some of the, the crate that my doll came in that
said, persists, that held a lot of the World War II
mementos, made it through. The cedar chest that
Daddy built with his own hands, made it, you know,
it was scarred, but it made it through. And a lot of
the stuff was in there. And I was more fortunate
than my brothers and sisters because I had clothes
in the sorority house at Texas. So I didn't lose
everything. Whereas my little sisters, Linda
can, they remember. In fact, she said it was the
first time she can remember. I think Lester's and
Braley's stayed open. And, you know, they went and
picked out clothes because, I mean, they
literally had none. And so your feelings about the
assistance that students, faculty, everybody
else can give. Oh, my goodness. And I can remember
standing in the yard, and Daddy was such a big man,
and I always felt so safe up beside him. And I can
remember us standing there and just watching the
flames come out. All right, so you're away on an
errand or something. You come back, and it is
beginning to burn. I think the trucks were already
there. Okay. Yeah. So that it was an hour or so that
it burns up. Okay, and all of this is- Seems like it
burned for a long time. And it's all in daylight.
Well, it seems like when I can remember, my memory
of Dad and standing in that backyard, it was
getting dark, or maybe the smoke made it dark. And
it started up high around the chimney. Apparently
the mortar had deteriorated between the bricks
and the big fire that George Washington, the black
man who was helping them. And it wasn't a terribly
cold day, was it? No, but it seems like when we got in
the next morning, it must have rained overnight
because every now and then the scent, the smell of
the burned house that we went in and it either
frozen or there was something wet that I can seem to
remember going in the next day. And so when they,
quote, put it out, the shell of the house is left.
And where'd y'all spend that first night? Over at
the boardroom with Miss Cashin. in the old border
house just north of Sevesa. And how long did your
family stay there? They stayed there for several
weeks and ate in Sevesa. And then the university
bought the house on Lee Street where Mrs. Jessup
lives now, Emily Jessup. And then do you know
anything about where the idea came from to build
another house where they built it? Mother says she
and Doris Hannigan walked and had something to do
with picking the side out. She could tell you
better. Now, I've heard the story that your dad
said that he picked the precise angle. Is that
right? That he wanted to be the first one on the
campus to see the sunrise. Can't you imagine him
saying that? I can. I don't remember hearing that.
I remember hearing about he didn't want the... You
know, those gnarly old mesquite trees that are
still there. He refused to let those be cut. And I
remember him being very proud of the pediment over
the front door, that he thought that was just fine.
All right, now that little gully out kind of in
front of the house that you have to cut, do you know
why that gully is there? No. That's where they dug
the clay for the bricks for Old May. Oh, my gosh. And
they made the bricks on site. So that's one of them.
All right, now let's see. Are those the same old
bricks that then went back into the house? Some of
those did, yes. Because there are old bricks used
in that. Yes, some of those did. Oh, that's neat.
Who designed it? Do you remember, did your mother
or dad have anything to do with the design of the
house? Yeah. Apparently a design was put forth
maybe by some people in architecture, and I don't
know names. And it was a very modern house being in
the early 60s. And that was, I guess, not
acceptable to a lot of people. Excuse me. So they
worked with Dee Dee Matthews and Gene Donahoe.
What was it, a year or so before? You know, I just,
I'm trying to think. It was more than a year. I want
to say they may have moved in in 65. after the
January 63 fire. So that in square footage, the
current President House may be smaller than the
old one was? I
don't know. I don't know. I didn't have that
feeling. Oh, no. The bedrooms were bigger
upstairs. And certainly it was finer. Now, are you
out of college by the time you move into the new
house? I guess I'm teaching in Houston. So you
never lived there. What was your mom's reaction to
the new house? She absolutely loved it.
Absolutely loved it. And they were able to use some
of the furniture. Downstairs, the old downless
sofas with the down cushions were recovered. And
those had been saved from the fire. And so there
were a few things that are kind of in that formal
front room. But the furniture that they were able
to buy. And people were so kind to donate so much of
the materials that were used that But it just
seemed like it was something everybody was proud
to have. Now, did your dad get involved much with
the planning of the interior, or did you leave that
to your mother? You'll have to ask her, because I
don't know. But he was all... Dad, you know, with
his degree in industrial education, I can
remember him doing things like... When we lived in
Brady, there was a surplus of bunk beds. So he
bought bunk beds for, especially my sister's
rooms, and then designed these headboards that
slipped down over and you could put, you know,
covered the whole things up so that they looked
like these wonderful beds. So he was really, he
was, Dad could spot problems or spot things that
needed to be. I'm sure he was. What were his
hobbies, his recreations? What did he do for fun? I
think friends. Okay. He didn't, he never golfed,
to my knowledge. We would walk a lot at night. Oh,
where? Oh, well, I can remember visiting after
they got into the new house. And so we would walk
from there then toward the main campus. But from
the old house, we would walk way out to the west
campus. None of that was developed. You remember
the road was always full of pits. But we would walk
way, way out that way. And he was not walking to
inspect or check on people? Oh, no. No, no. And who
would go on the walk? Whoever was there. Would your
mom go? Sure. Mother has always kind of had foot
problems, so long walks were kind of not her thing.
They were some of my favorite things. But you kids
would go? Uh-huh. If y'all had a house guest, would
some people? Mm-hmm. Now, I thought he hunted
some. He did, when we would go to the ranch, yeah.
But that wasn't that big of a thing? Do you have
friends who are hunters? I'm sure you do. Mm-hmm.
Dad was never like that. And he didn't have a
sit-down hobby, did he? No. He didn't collect
stamps? He loved, like, kind of a regular Sunday
afternoon would be to go to church and then dinner
and then maybe a little nap and then a long drive. He
loved to get out in the country and... See what was
blooming. If there, on a Saturday, if there wasn't
a football game, what would he do on a Saturday? He
had classes Saturday morning, I know, but the
Saturday afternoon, Saturday
evening. I know. Let's see, Methodist, you know,
and you all went to the A&M Methodist Church. And
Pinky Downs usually came down and sat with us. And
he would bring Dad, I can still see, he would check
stories, like if the story was here, He would have
these real hard, he would check all around the
story that dad was told. And he would bring
newspapers. And circle the story. Now as far as you
know, was your dad well acquainted with Pinky
before y'all moved here? I have no, see I don't know
that. My brother would come to football games with
dad. But I never did that, so I don't know. All
right,
at the Methodist Church, you all went regularly.
Did you children have an option when you were in
high school? What if you had said, I don't want to go
this morning? When I had to, you're talking to the
big sister that has one of those pins with all the
bars for perfect attendance. And truly, it
started in Brady. And I can remember sitting more
with my grandmother in church than sitting with
mother and dad. But you're also demonstrating it
never occurred to you not to go, did it? No. Same
here. Yeah. We do. What else do you do on Sunday
morning? And when my kids got to the point they
didn't want to do that, I'd say, you know. So the
only thing I could do was hold lunch over their
heads. So Sunday school and church. NYF. In the
early evenings was very important. All right. Did
y'all have a Sunday night preaching then? Mm-hmm.
James R.Q.? Did you ever know James R.Q.? Oh, yeah.
He was here, and he was wonderful. Now, I heard a few
people who thought that in order to really make
progress as an A&M administrator, you had to be a
Methodist. I heard that too. I heard that too. I
guess there's always probably one church in a
community that small that most people go to. And as
you were growing up, you can never remember when
Texas A&M wasn't mentioned warmly. Oh, our house
in Brady. I had maroon and white towels.
But A&M for years was just something I heard about.
Yeah. And your brothers, it never occurred to them
that they would have an option as to where they
would go to school? No. No. And really, you were
asking about that when I got ready to go to college.
Dad said, really, sister, your choice is your TWU
or Texas. And that wasn't a tough choice at that
time. Do you remember going to Mustard's? You
know, I don't. See, muster now is much bigger than
it used to be. Is that right? Oh, see, Sterling
Evans doesn't remember a muster before World War
II. I was really not encouraged to do university
things. I mean, I was a 16-year-old. So, be who you
are. Absolutely. uh very very good uh let's see uh
and your mother of course although she had gone to
the university of texas it she had been married to
an aggie long enough that it had she had no
emotional adjustment problem you know do you
remember now you don't mention any names if you
have any do you remember anybody any rudeness that
your parents experienced when they got here Oh, I
couldn't imagine anybody being rude to my dad. No,
I have no recollection of that. Now, you were
saying that one of the kids said, Earl, we're here.
Do you remember any other teasing names that
students or anybody else used to refer to your dad?
Because his name was James Earl, wasn't it?
Mm-hmm. But I never heard anybody call him, refer
to him as Jimmy or J-E. Only the Rangers, you know,
in the service. He was Jim or Big Jim. Oh, really?
Yeah. Yeah. You know, because they go so strictly
by your first name. That's right. Yeah. So in the
war, apparently. Yeah. At the time you all moved
here, your dad was physically, what was he, six
feet tall? He was six feet. Yeah, was he 6 or was he
taller? I don't know. Maybe he was 6'2". He was a big
man. By what would he have weighed? Oh, very,
probably 235. Because I've heard him, two or three
years later, I heard him refer to himself
occasionally. Potbelly present. And I don't
remember him having a potbelly. Maybe I didn't
observe, but I didn't. So I always thought, well,
he was trying to disarm everybody from not being
too serious. What do you think made him most proud
of his years here? What do you think he was? I think
the growth. I think the growth was really
important, and sort of the change in attitude.
toward A&M. That, you know, when he came it was
small and it was strictly military and that's why
I'm sure he was chosen to come. That's what I
understand. But he was wise enough to have the
vision that
it couldn't stay that way. Do you particularly
share with me, if you can, anything that you recall
about his feelings on co-education and making a
co-volunteer? You know, I really don't. And when I
try to think of something specific to remember
about how he felt, I think the way he would,
wherever we were, he would introduce himself. I'm
Earl Gutter, I'm from Texas A&M. And that almost,
just his pride in that. I'm. Because I think I told
you the other day, when I got back the first draft
that I had written of the Aspirations Report that
had those recommendations, he had some, he had
some very tough questions. Why this, why this, why
that? And I had assumed that he was wondering what
those questions really meant is can we make it, can
we get the board to approve it, can we get the people
to support it? I read nothing into it that he was
saying I'm opposed to it. And let me elucidate a
little more on that. There was a referendum soon
after that during that academic year, a
referendum of the student body on these two
questions. Overwhelmingly, the students
approved. We're having a faculty meeting in the
old chemistry lecture of arts and sciences And
your dad, as was his pattern, would speak to each of
the college faculties once a year. And this was
Arts and Sciences Day. And so we were not going to
have a faculty referendum. And we faculty were
really uptight about that. You know, why in the
world? And in his remarks, he didn't say a single
thing about faculty referendum. So there were
questions and answers. And they said, OK, now
there's time for one more question. I'm sitting in
the next to back row, and I raise my hand, and I think
it was Cooper recognized, and I stood up, and I was
so frightened that my voice quivered. And I said,
you know, Mr. President, there's a referendum
tomorrow for students. Why aren't you having a
faculty referendum? And he then chuckled and
said, hell, I don't need to have a faculty
referendum. I know y'all are all in favor of these
things. Everybody said, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah,
meeting adjourned. And as we walked out, most of my
buddies walked by and said, where are you working
next year? Well, now we're about seven, eight
years later. This is the last session I ever had
with your dad. And I was in there begging for more
money for the library, as chairman of the library
committee. And in the end of the conversation, I
said, do you remember that question I asked you
that day? And he said, yes. And I remember how
frightened you were. I was dumbfounded that his
memory was that sharp. Also, I want to mention to
you, in that conversation, I then said... He
really had. He really had. I don't care how gruff he
had to be to get stuff done, he did have such a tender
heart. And you see, some of us didn't know that for a
while. And I said, we're talking about all these
changes. I said, only you could have done it. And he
said, what do you mean? Now, by this time, you know
how you kind of sometimes sit around... And he
said, what do you mean? I said, well, sir, they
couldn't say you weren't a Texan, that you weren't
an Aggie, that you hadn't been in the Corps, that
you hadn't served your country, that you didn't
work hard, that you didn't have a strong personal
private life, that, you know, there wasn't any
gossip or anything out there. They couldn't say
you didn't know your way around Austin and that you
weren't acquainted with people named Connelly
and Johnson and Teague and Pickle and things like
that. and that you were one of those fuddy-duddy
PhDs from somewhere way off. He leaned back and he
said, oh, I never thought about any of that. I said,
oh, I'm sure you didn't. Well, by then he was
chocolate.
And did you sense in him satisfaction that
progress was being made in the 60s? No. You have to
remember, too, I finished high school in 1960. I
went three years to Austin and finished there. I
taught two years in Houston, and then I went to
Massachusetts. I taught there, and then I moved to
Michigan. But by then, the enrollment was going.
So my contact, especially after the mid-'60s,
you didn't call like we do now. We sure didn't
travel like we do now. So I really missed a lot of
that. And A&M was really, really making great
progress during those days. One of the big deals
when I was teaching in Newton, Massachusetts, was
Dad was going to be on, I think it was the Today Show,
and was going to be interviewed by Sandra Van Oker.
And my principal made arrangements to have a TV so
that I could watch Dad on national television. And
I've got a feeling that his confidence of doing
that was about where yours was, asking that
question. He was so ill at ease. Alright, now, what
do you think of his
duties until the Which part of his duties do you
think he enjoyed most and enjoyed least? Most he
probably enjoyed the students. Okay. Like he
didn't enjoy speech making? No. He didn't enjoy
speech making. What about going to Austin and
Washington to work directly with the key leaders?
Did he enjoy that? You know, I never remember Dad
complaining about anything that he had. You know,
I never remember regrets.
I never remember spoken
hate that just wasn't in his name. If it was the job,
you did it. And I think I inherited that from him. I
think my kids have inherited that. You know, you
just... Life doesn't come to you on a platter. And
you just... Whatever the job is, you do it. I have
the impression that... And I think one day he kind
of referred to this in a brief conversation. I have
the impression that Governor John Connolly would
sometimes chat directly with your dad about
suggested board appointments. I can remember
when I was in Austin that dad would come and meet
with Governor Connolly. And I remember getting to
go pick dad up one day and getting introduced to
Governor Connolly and just being so charmed. But
for dad to then turn around and tell me at lunch what
they talked about just was not his nature. Because
I have the impression that even the problems too,
that he kept those inside. I assume. I assume.